
{'source': 'MolGenetMetab_136_306_2022.pdf', 'page': 0}

Metabolomics analysis reveals dysregulation in one carbon metabolism
in Friedreich Ataxia
Thomas M. O'Connella,b,c,⁎, David L. Logsdonb,c,R .M a r kP a y n ed
a Department of Otolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, United States of America
b Department of Anatomy, Cell Biology & Physiology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, United States of America
c Indiana Center for Musculoskeletal Health, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, United States of America
d Department of Pediatrics, Division of Cardiology, and Herman B Wells Center for Pediatric Research, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, United States of America
abstractarticle info
Article history:
Received 24 February 2022
Received in revised form 14 May 2022
Accepted 5 June 2022
Available online 13 June 2022
Friedreich Ataxia (FA) is a rare and often fatal autosomal recessive disease in which a mitochondrial protein,
frataxin (FXN), is severely reduced in all tissues. With loss of FXN, mitochondrial metabolism is severely
disrupted. Multiple therapeutic approaches are in development, but a key limitation is the lack of biomarkers
reﬂecting the activity of FXN in a timely fashion. We predicted this dysregulated metabolism would present a
unique metabolite proﬁle in blood of FA patients versus Controls (Con). Plasma from 10 FA and 11 age and sex
matched Con subjects was analyzed by targeted mass spectrometry and untargeted NMR. This combined ap-
proach yielded quantitative measurements for 540 metabolites and found 59 unique metabolites (55 from MS
and 4 from NMR) that were signiﬁcantly different between cohorts. Correlation-based network analysis revealed
several clusters of pathway related metabolites including a cluster associated with one‑carbon (1C) metabolism
composed of formate, sarcosine, hypoxanthine, and homocysteine. Receiver operator characteristics analyses
demonstrated an excellent ability to discriminate between Con and FA with AUC values >0.95. These results
are theﬁrst reported metabolomic analyses of human patients with FA. The metabolic perturbations, especially
those related to 1C metabolism, may serve as a valuable biomarker panel of disease progression and response
to therapy. The identiﬁcation of dysregulated 1C metabolism may also inform the search for new therapeutic tar-
gets related to this pathway.
© 2022 Published by Elsevier Inc.
Keywords:
Friedreich Ataxia
Metabolomics
Biomarkers
One‑carbon metabolism
1. Introduction
Friedreich Ataxia (FA) [OMIM 229300] is a rare mitochondrial disor-
der that results in a progressive neuro- and cardio-degenerative disease
and typically begins in childhood. It is caused by the low expression of a
small mitochondrial protein, frataxin (FXN), and leads to loss of motor
skills and a cardiomyopathy within 10–15 years of diagnosis [1]. Pa-
tients develop a primary neurodegeneration of the dorsal root ganglia
(DRG) leading to the hallmark clinicalﬁndings of progressive ataxia
and debilitating scoliosis [2,3]. A signiﬁcant percentage of patients will
also develop a severe hypertrophic cardiomyopathy leading to death
in the 3rd to 5th decade of life [4,5].
Although it is the most common inherited ataxia in humans, it is a
rare disease with a prevalence of approximately 1 in 50,000 Caucasians,
and a population estimated at <6000 in the United States. Inheritance is
autosomal recessive with equal frequency in males and females [6]a n d
a carrier frequency of 1:60 to 1:120 [7–10]. The gene defect was identi-
ﬁed in 1996 as a large GAA triplet expansion, frequently >800 repeats,
in the ﬁrst intron of the human FXN gene (FRDA) on chromosome
9q21.11 [11]. There is a correlation between GAA repeat number and
the onset and severity of clinical symptoms with higher repeat numbers
being associated with earlier onset and more rapid rate of disease pro-
gression [12,13].
The exact function of frataxin is not fully established [14] but it is
known to play a signiﬁcant role in iron metabolism, iron storage, and
iron‑sulfur (Fe/S) cluster biogenesis with numerous downstream effects
including alterations to cellular energy metabolism [15]. The Fe/S pro-
teins are ubiquitous components that have a diverse set of functions
and are found in virtually all living cells. A number of enzymes that
are critical to cellular energy metabolism are dependent on Fe/S clusters
including mitochondrial electron transport chain complexes I, II, and III,
aconitase in the Krebs Cycle, and electron transferﬂavoprotein (ETF). In
its absence or with reduced levels, ATP production within mitochondria
Molecular Genetics and Metabolism 136 (2022) 306–314
⁎ Corresponding author at: Department of Otolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery,
Indiana University School of Medicine, 1300 W. Michigan St, Suite 400, Indianapolis, IN
46202, United States of America.
E-mail address:thoconne@iu.edu(T.M. O'Connell).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2022.06.002
1096-7192/© 2022 Published by Elsevier Inc.
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Molecular Genetics and Metabolism
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ymgme

{'source': 'MolGenetMetab_136_306_2022.pdf', 'page': 1}

is severely decreased with multiple metabolic effects [16,17] and signif-
icant alterations in nuclear gene expression [18].
The resulting defect in the electron transport chain and Krebs Cycle
also causes a disruption in the NAD/NADH ratio [16], which is associated
with heavy acetylation of multiple proteins throughout the mitochon-
drial matrix [19]. This may be associated with impaired oxidation of
fatty acids and a shift to glycolysis in energy dependent tissues, such
as heart [17,20].
Several new therapeutic approaches are now in clinical trials includ-
ing Etravirine (NCT04273165), and Resveratrol (NCT03933163) (see
listing at https://www.curefa.org/pipeline ). A major challenge for
these trials is the inability to quickly monitor a biochemical response
to the intervention. In the absence of an easily assayable function for
FXN, it is difﬁcult to measure the pharmacodynamic response to the
therapeutic drug to establish a dose-response relationship. Thus, trials
have used clinical endpoints, such as the modiﬁed Friedreich's Ataxia
Rating Scale (mFARS), but power analyses and recent assessment of
progression characteristics have shown that trials using these endpoints
need to be conducted for at least 1 to 2 years [21]. What is needed to ac-
celerate drug discovery are a set of biomarkers that represent the de-
ranged pathophysiology in FA and can rapidly and quantitatively
detect the efﬁcacy of an intervention.
The ﬁeld of metabolomics involves the comprehensive analysis of
small molecules reﬂecting the substrates, intermediates, and products
of cellular metabolism [22]. Given the severe metabolic perturbations
predicted and observed in FA, it is surprising that metabolomics analy-
ses have not been applied to human FA subjects before now. Using a
comprehensive, multi-platform metabolomics approach our laboratory
has found a highly distinctive metabolic signature in FA patients includ-
ing speciﬁc alterations to one‑carbon (1C) metabolism related path-
ways. Importantly, this metabolite panel could accurately distinguish
controls from FA patients with high sensitivity and speciﬁcity suggest-
ing this may have signiﬁcant potential to serve as a biomarker panel
to report on disease progression and therapeutic interventions. Receiver
operator characteristics analysis of the top 10 biomarkers yielded an
area under the curve of 0.96 (CI = 0.75–1.0). This is theﬁrst report of
perturbations to 1C metabolism pathway in FA. The mechanisms by
which this dysregulated pathway impacts the disease state, including
mitochondrial dysfunction and ultimately heart failure, are completely
unexplored.
2. Results
The study cohort was composed of 11 healthy controls (Con) and 10
patients with Friedreich Ataxia (FA). Patient characteristics for all sub-
jects in the study are shown inTable 1. Of the FA subjects, 70% were
on one or more cardiac medications includingβ-blockers, calcium chan-
nel blockers, or diuretics. Two FA subjects were also on medications to
control angina. No FA or Con subjects were on medication for diabetes.
Two FA subjects were on chronic medications for muscle spasm or pain,
and 60% of FA subjects were on a medication intended to help slow the
advance or treat the neurologic symptom of FA including Idebenone and
one subject who was also on selegiline. The Con subjects were on none
of these medications. The FA cohort was composed of 9 Caucasian and 1
Black subjects, whereas the Con cohort was composed of 11 Caucasian
subjects. For the FA cohort, the average GAA repeat length on the
shorter allele ranged from 158 repeats to >800, with an average of
612 repeats. The age at FA diagnosis ranged from 5 yr (GAA repeat
400) to 23 yr (GAA repeat = 549), with an average age at diagnosis of
14.1 ± 5.9 yr. There were no signiﬁcant differences in age, sex, weight,
height, or BMI between the groups.
2.1. Metabolomics analysis yields distinct metabolic phenotype in FA pa-
tients
Metabolic proﬁling of serum from all subjects in this study was car-
ried out using a comprehensive, multi-platform approach that included
a targeted mass spectrometry (MS) platform and an untargeted nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR)-based platform. The combined approach
yielded quantitative measurements of 540 metabolites and found 59
unique metabolites (55 from MS and 4 from NMR) that were signiﬁ-
cantly different between the control and FA groups. A heatmap of the
metabolites is shown inFig. 1revealing distinct metabolite patterns
for the Con compared with the FA.
To better represent the magnitude and signiﬁcance of the speciﬁc
changes, a set of volcano plots are shown inFig. 2.T or e d u c ec r o w d i n g
in the plots, the dataset was divided into the 23 hydrophilic metabolites
and the 36 lipid-related metabolites.Fig. 2A shows the hydrophilic
Table 1
Patient characteristics for all subjects in the study.
Parameter Con ( n = 11) FA ( n = 10)
Age (yr) 28 ± 8.7 23.3 ± 5.4
Sex 6F/5M 5F/5M
Wt (kg) 74.2 ± 10.8 75.7 ± 21.1
Ht (cm) 170.4 ± 11.1 187.8 ± 8.3
BMI (kg/M2) 25.8 ± 6.3 25.3 ± 5.5
Baseline Medications
Cardiac 0% 70%
Pain 0% 20%
FA speciﬁc 0% 60%
Con FA
Fig. 1.Heatmap of signiﬁcant metabolites in control and FA subjects. Metabolites are rep-
resented as z-scores with red indicating higher levels and blue indicating lower levels.
T.M. O'Connell, D.L. Logsdon and R.M. Payne Molecular Genetics and Metabolism 136 (2022) 306–314
307

{'source': 'MolGenetMetab_136_306_2022.pdf', 'page': 2}

metabolites. The main plot shows metabolites with both positive and
negative fold changes while the expansion shows that the three most
signiﬁcantly altered metabolites in terms of both fold change and signif-
icance are sarcosine, hypoxanthine and formate.Supplemental Table 1
lists the log2 fold changes and Wilcoxonp- v a l u e sf o rt h e s em e t a b o l i t e s .
The individual metabolite differences are shown as boxplots inSupple-
mental Fig. 1.
Fig. 2B shows the volcano plot for the 36 lipid-related species.
The expansion shows the two most signiﬁcantly altered lipids are a
cholesterol ester having an unsaturated 20 carbon fatty acid chain
Fig. 2.Volcano plot of Signiﬁcant Metabolites (A) 23 hydrophilic metabolites with expansion of the three most signiﬁcantly altered metabolites and (B) 36 lipid related metabolites with
expansion of two most signiﬁcantly perturbed lipid species. The red shaded region highlights the 14 TGs and two DGs which are all signiﬁcantly increased except for TG_6 (TG(18:1,26:0).
See supplementary Table 2 for the full names of the lipid metabolites along with log2 fold changes andp-values.
T.M. O'Connell, D.L. Logsdon and R.M. Payne Molecular Genetics and Metabolism 136 (2022) 306–314
308

{'source': 'MolGenetMetab_136_306_2022.pdf', 'page': 3}

and a dihydroceramide with 18 and 22 carbon unsaturated fatty acid
chains. The main plot shows that most of the lipids are triglycerides
(TG) or phosphocholines (PC). To minimize overlap of the labels, the
TGs and PCs were numbered. The fold change and signiﬁcance values
along with the full metabolite names are included inSupplemental
Table 2. With one exception (TG_6), all of the triglycerides are
elevated in the FA patients while all of the phosphocholines are
decreased.
Note that in addition to the Wilcoxon analysis we also applied the
Bonferroni and Benjamini-Hochberg multiple testing criteria. With
those analyses, one metabolite, a cholesterol ester, CE(20:0) had signif-
icant p-value of 0.019. The metabolites sarcosine and formate had
Bonferroni correctedp-values of 0.052 and 0.059 respectively. Given
the large number of metabolites measured and the relatively small
number of samples, these multiple testing corrections are quite aggres-
sive and may not be appropriate for a study of this size. The correlation
analyses described ahead will add conﬁdence and biological plausibility
to the biomarkers.
To search for patterns among the altered metabolites, a Pearson cor-
relation matrix was calculated to identify clusters of correlated metabo-
lites. Supplemental Fig. 2shows a correlogram where the correlations
that meet a p-value signiﬁcance threshold of 0.05 are shown with pos-
itive correlations in blue and negative correlation in red. This plot
makes it clear that the TG and PC lipids have strong inter-correlations.
Near the center is a set of metabolites that includes hypoxanthine, for-
mate, sarcosine, hydroxypropionylcarnitine (C3.OH) and homocysteine.
These metabolites show signiﬁcant positive correlations to many of the
PCs along with negative correlations to a cluster of metabolites at
the bottom of the chart which includes acetate, dodecanedioc acid
(DiCA.12.0), indoxylsulfate (Ind.SO4), arginine, glucose and carnitine
(C0). This latter cluster also shows signiﬁcant negative correlations
with many of the PCs.
2.2. Network community analysis identiﬁes altered one‑carbon metabolism
In order to further understand the patterns of metabolite changes, a
correlation-based network community analysis was carried out using
the Girvan-Newman algorithm [23]. In this approach, the metabolites
are the network nodes and the network edges (connections between
nodes) are the Pearson correlations. The algorithm detects communities
by iteratively removing edges from the graph to break it down into
smaller, highly connected pieces i.e., communities. In the context of
metabolomics, this approach is intended to reveal clusters of metabo-
lites that are highly correlated and thus could represent speciﬁc path-
ways. Note that not all of the signiﬁcantly altered metabolites are
shown in the network community diagram as the algorithm did not
ﬁnd sufﬁcient connections for some metabolites to be included in a
community.
The network community analysis diagram generated using all 59
of the signiﬁcant metabolites is shown inSupplemental Fig. 3.T h e
algorithm detected four distinct communities whose members are
listed inSupplemental Table 2. It is clear that that the second com-
munity (blue) is dominated by PCs and the fourth community
(green) is dominated by TGs. To simplify the network, the lipids
were excluded. Fig. 3shows this reduced network community dia-
gram which identiﬁed ﬁve communities. The community shown in
green contains arginine, glucose and carnitine. The latter two metab-
olites play a major role in carbohydrate and fatty acid metabolism.
The community shown in gray contains glutamate and acetate,
which also have a relationship with energy metabolism. The commu-
nity shown in red contains the amino acids lysine and histidine and
the community in yellow contain contains the branched chain
amino acids, leucine and valine. The largest community shown in
blue forms a dense network of 10 metabolites. This community in-
cludes formate, sarcosine, hypoxanthine, choline, homocysteine,
threonine, ornithine, lactate, hydroxypropionylcarnitine (C3.OH)
and succinate. Theﬁrst ﬁve of these metabolites suggest a connection
to one‑carbon metabolism.
2.3. Metabolite proﬁles provide accurate discrimination of FA patients from
controls
A primary goal of this study was to develop a metabolic bio-
marker panel that could be used to distinguish FA patients from
controls. The composition of the panel would help identify the met-
abolic defects in FA and this panel could then be used to quickly
monitor disease progression and the ef ﬁcacy of therapeutic
interventions. To evaluate the ability of this biomarker panel to
distinguish between control and FA patients, a receiver operating
characteristic (ROC) analyses were carried out. Using Monte-Carlo
cross validation along with classiﬁcation and feature ranking using
Random Forests, the ROC curves shown inFig. 4 were generated.
The curves include those made using the entire set of 59 metabolites
along with various feature ranked subsets down to only three me-
tabolites. The performance of the biomarker panel is evaluated by
the areas under the curve (AUC) with a value of 1 being perfect clas-
siﬁcation and 0.5 being random. Each of the curves, including the
one generated using only three metabolites provides excellent dis-
crimination with a mean AUC value >0.95. The conﬁdence intervals
also indicated excellent performance with the lowest value in the
series being 0.685 when only three metabolites (formate, choles-
terol ester 20:0 and sarcosine) were used.
In its current form, the biomarker panel shows a sensitivity of >0.9
with a speciﬁcity of about 0.8, indicating a strong ability to accurately
detect the true-positives while minimizing false positives. This being
said, this assay must be validated in a much larger cohort in order to
evaluate clinical utility. Furthermore, the biomarker panel must be
tested for the ability to rapidly respond to therapeutic interventions in
order to satisfy one of the crucial unmet clinical needs.
Fig. 3.Correlation Network Community Diagram of the hydrophilic metabolites. The
Girvan-Newman algorithm applied to a Pearson correlation matrix identify highly con-
nected subgraphs representing communities of metabolites. The analysis revealsﬁve com-
munities indicated by the colors. The metabolite composition of the largest community
suggests perturbations to 1C metabolism. Non-standard metabolite abbreviations include
C0, carnitine; Ace, acetate; Orn, ornithine, Sarc, sarcosine; Form, formate; Suc, succinate;
C3:OH, hydroxypropionlycarnitine; Hxan, hypoxanthine; HCys, homocysteine; Chol, cho-
line and Lac, lactate.
T.M. O'Connell, D.L. Logsdon and R.M. Payne Molecular Genetics and Metabolism 136 (2022) 306–314
309

{'source': 'MolGenetMetab_136_306_2022.pdf', 'page': 4}

3. Discussion
FA is fundamentally a metabolic disease with systemic impact and is
especially disruptive for the heart and nervous system. Given the role
that FXN is predicted to have in the biosynthesis of ubiquitous
iron‑sulfur clusters and the potential for reduced FXN to profoundly
alter cellular metabolism, it is surprising that there has been little appli-
cation of metabolomics analyses to this disease. To our knowledge there
have been two applications of metabolomics to FA to date, both using
animal models. In the study by Martin et al., a metabolomics analyses
on murine hearts in a model of FA cardiomyopathy revealed altered en-
ergy metabolism including increasedﬂux through glucose utilizing
pathways and altered phosphocreatine/ATP and phosphocreatine/crea-
tine ratios [17]. This study also revealed that supplementation with the
NAD precursor, nicotinamide mononucleotide (NMN) was able to re-
duce the energetic dependence upon glycolysis and increase the oxida-
tive utilization of glucose.
In a second study focused on the neurodegeneration in FA, Hayashi
et al., used a targeted tandem MS method to measure a panel of oxylipins
in cerebellar samples [24]. Their studies revealed that reduced expres-
sion of frataxin leads to an elevation of COX-2 mediated oxylipin synthe-
sis, stimulated by increases in transcription factors as a result of increase
in reactive oxygen species (ROS). The role of ROS in FA is well established
and several in vitro studies using cultured cells from FA patients have
shown that treatment with SS-31, a mitochondrial targeting peptide
with antioxidant properties, along with iron chelators including deferox-
amine and BAPTA-AM, mitigated cellular dysfunctions in FAﬁbroblasts
[25,26]. Clinical trials in the past have logically included antioxidants
and iron chelation [27,28]. Although they have shown mild biochemical
improvement [29], they have not been clinically effective [30].
Very early biochemical studies in FA patients suggested that pyru-
vate metabolism along with alterations in taurine andβ-alanine were
characteristic of FA [31]. The perturbations in pyruvate metabolism
were not observed in all patients, but found in a signiﬁcant subset.
Our results also showed signiﬁcant changes in glucose and pyruvate
levels. The predisposition of FA patients to diabetes may be related to
theseﬁnding. Both taurine andβ-alanine were included in our analyses,
but neither showed a signiﬁcant difference.
In this study, we present theﬁrst application of metabolomics to
human FA patients. Our multi-platform, mass spectrometry and NMR-
based approach provided a unique and comprehensive picture of the
serum metabolome including a wide range of lipids as well as hydro-
philic metabolites. Overall, we found an intriguing association of many
of the most signiﬁcantly altered metabolites with pathways involved
in one‑carbon metabolism including the folate cycle, methionine sal-
vage, and purine nucleotide salvage and synthesis. The pathway dia-
gram shown inFig. 5shows the relationship between these pathways
and our metabolomicsﬁndings.
The majorﬁndings from the lipids were the signiﬁcant decreases in
phosphocholines and the increases in triglycerides. Elevated triglycer-
ides are a consistent feature in FA patients [32,33]. Even though none
of the FA subjects had overt diabetes, some of this dyslipidemia could
be the result of a pre-diabetic state given that the FA subjects had signif-
icantly higher serum glucose levels (Supplemental Fig. 1). It is known
that there is an increased prevalence of diabetes in FA patients [34,35].
The observation of signiﬁcantly reduced PCs is a more novelﬁnding.
Phosphatidylcholine synthesis is thought to be the largest 1C sink in
adult mammals [36]. As shown inFig. 5, the reduced levels of choline
(log2FC =−0.362, p = 0.009) could lead to the reduction in the PCs.
Note that mammalian cells cannot synthesize choline and therefore it
comes from the diet. The reduced levels therefore indicated increased
usage although decreased dietary absorption must also be considered.
Another potential fate of choline is transformation to betaine to enable
the synthesis of methionine from homocysteine. Maintaining the me-
thionine levels and thus appropriate levels of S-adenosylmethionine
(SAM) and S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH) in the methionine salvage
pathway is critical to preserving the methylating capacity of the cells
[36]. The reduced levels of homocysteine (logFC =−0.548, p =
0.036) observed would also be consistent with dysregulation in the
methionine salvage pathway.
The two metabolites with the most signiﬁcance alterations are
formate (log2FC =−1.170, p = 0.0001) and sarcosine (log2FC =
1–0.841, p = 0.0001). As shown inFig. 5,o n e‑carbon units can be gen-
erated in the mitochondria in the folate cycle from the amino acids, ser-
ine and glycine, as well as the choline metabolites, sarcosine and
dimethylglycine. These reactions ultimately generate formate that can
function as an inter-organ and inter-organelle shuttle of one‑carbon
units. The mitochondrial transformation of tetrahydrofolate (THF) to
5,10-methylene-THF can be coupled to the demethylation of serine or
sarcosine to glycine via serine hydroxymethyltransferase (SHMT) or
sarcosine dehydrogenase (SDH). Further transformation by methylene-
tetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase 2 (MTHFD2) yields 10-formyl-THF
which is then converted back to THF with the release of formate by
the action of methylenetetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase (MTHFD1L).
The signiﬁcant reduction in circulating formate found in FA patients is
highly suggestive of dysregulated folate metabolism.
There are also non-folate-dependent pathways that can generate
formate including the catabolism of threonine and kynurenine, peroxi-
somal β-oxidation of branched chain fatty acids, and cytochrome P-450
mediated demethylation and oxidation reactions [37]. No differences in
the levels of kynurenine were observed. The levels of threonine are in-
deed reduced in FA patients, which may indicate some contribution
from this pathway (see,Supplemental Table 1,L o g 2 F C=−0.437,
p = 0.014). The oxidation of branched chain fatty acids would be ex-
pected to be dependent primarily upon dietary sources of these fatty
acids which would not likely be different in the FA and Con groups.
Thus, it appears more plausible that the reduced formate levels are the
result of folate cycle dysregulation.
It is interesting to note that the serine levels in the FA patients were
not signiﬁcantly altered. Serine is a major source of formate produced in
mitochondria which is then released into the cytosol. As shown inFig. 5,
in the cytosol, the transformation of 5,10-methylene-THF back to THF is
coupled to the resynthesis of serine from glycine via serine hydroxy-
methyltransferase 1 (SHMT2). The ability of the folate cycle to consume
Fig. 4.Receiver operating characteristic curves for FA biomarkers. Legend lists the number
of metabolites included in the model, the AUCs and the conﬁdence intervals.
T.M. O'Connell, D.L. Logsdon and R.M. Payne Molecular Genetics and Metabolism 136 (2022) 306–314
310

{'source': 'MolGenetMetab_136_306_2022.pdf', 'page': 5}

serine in the mitochondria and resynthesize it in the cytosol may play a
role in the maintenance of serine levels, even under the conditions of a
dysregulation of 1C metabolism.
The reduced levels of sarcosine also suggest perturbations in 1C me-
tabolism. Sarcosine can be derived from the catabolism of choline which
is coupled to the remethylation of homocysteine to methionine. In this
process, choline is transformed to betaine aldehyde via choline dehy-
drogenase. This is followed by the action of aldehyde dehydrogenase
yielding betaine. Betaine homocysteine-S-methyltransferase (BHMT)
converts betaine and homocysteine to methionine and dimethylglycine.
Finally, dimethylglycine is converted to sarcosine via dimethylglycine
dehydrogenase. Sarcosine can then donate its methyl group to THF
forming 5,10-methylene THF. Reduced levels of sarcosine could there-
fore lead to a reduction in folate 1C units.
Interestingly, dimethylglycine dehydrogenase (DMGDH), as well
as sarcosine dehydrogenase (SDH), are both coupled to the electron
transfer ﬂavoproteins (ETF) [38]. ETFs are a group of Fe/S containing
proteins that are electron acceptors of several dehydrogenases and
feed electrons to ETF:ubiquinone oxidoreductase (ETF:QO) complex
in the electron transport chain. Thus, dysregulation of DMGDH due
to impaired Fe/S biogenesis may be a factor in the reduced sarcosine
levels. Sarcosine can also be generated by the transformation of me-
thionine derived SAM to SAH which is coupled to glycine- N-
methyltransferase GNMT) which donates a methyl group to glycine
forming sarcosine.
As there is no established essential function for sarcosine, the func-
tion of GNMT may not be to generate sarcosine, but to regulate the
levels of SAM and SAH [39]. The overall SAM/SAH ratio is sometimes
considered to be an index of the methylating capacity of the cell. The
dysregulated sarcosine levels could lead to wide ranging dysregulation
in cellular methylation reactions.
Purine nucleotide synthesis is connected to the folate cycle through
the reaction of 10-formyl-THF with ribose-5-phosphate to form inosine
monophosphate (IMP), which goes on to form other purine nucleotides;
see Fig. 5. Given a potential deﬁcit in the production of 10-formyl-THF by
a dysregulated folate cycle, purine nucleotide synthesis may be deﬁcient
as well. Another potential resource for purine nucleotide synthesis is
through the salvage pathway involving the conversion of hypoxanthine
(HXan) to IMP via hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase
(HPRT1). The reduced levels of HXan (see Supplementary Table 1,
log2FC =−1.650, p = 0.0004) would be consistent with an attempt of
the purine salvage pathway to support purine nucleotide synthesis dur-
ing a deﬁcit of 10-formyl-THF.
Another potential fate of hypoxanthine is the degradation to xan-
thine via xanthine oxidase (XO) and then to uric acid (UA). In support
of this hypothesis, Schirinzi et al., reported an increase in serum UA in
a study comparing 19 FA patients with 26 controls [40]. Circulating UA
can have a beneﬁcial antioxidant functions that may be consistent
with the established oxidative stress associated with FA [40]. Con-
versely, elevated UA has also been suggested to act as a biomarker of
ATP consumption, particularly under conditions of energy crisis as
might be expected to occur in the FA heart.
3.1. Mitochondrial dysfunction as a driver of dysregulation in one-carbon
metabolism
Several recent studies have revealed metabolic signatures of mi-
tochondrial dysfunction in genetic disorders. In a study of Leigh
Syndrome, a mitochondrial respiratory chain disease, Legault
et al., found several signiﬁcant metabolic perturbations including
alterations in amino acid catabolism linked to NADH status and
NAD+ biosynthesis [ 41]. Interestingly, Sharma et al., also found
metabolic perturbations associated with NADH/NAD+ metabolism
in another genetic mitochondrial disorder, m.3243A > G variant of
mitochondrial encephalopathy lactic acidosis and stroke-like epi-
sodes (MELAS) [42].
A strong connection between mitochondrial functioning and 1C
metabolism has been shown in several recent studies. In an elegant
SHMT2
SDH
MTHFD2
MTHFD1L
5,10-me-THF
5,10-me-THF
10-formyl-THF10-formyl-THF
MTHFD1
MTHFD1
SHMT1
Gly
Ser
Ser
Sarc
MitochondriaCytosol
Folate
Cycle
MTHFR
5-me-THF
MTR
Met
Gly
GCS
Formate
THF
BHMT
Betaine
DMG
HCys
Choline
Phosphocholine
PCs
DMG
Sarc
SAM
SAH
Methionine 
Salvage
Rib-5P
IMP HXan
Xan Uric 
Acid*
Purine 
Salvage
Purine 
Nucleo/g415de Cycle
HPRT1
XO -Hist
Gly
Sarc
DMGDH
GNMT
Fig. 5.Speciﬁc perturbations to 1C metabolism and related pathways. The pathway diagram shows the inter-relationship of three key components of 1C metabolism including the folate
cycle, purine nucleotide metabolism and methionine salvage. Metabolites in blue were altered in the serum of FA patients. Metabolite names: DMG, dimethylglycine; Gly, glycine; HCys,
homocysteine; Hist, histamine; HXan, hypoxanthine; IMP, inosine monophosphate; Met, methionine; 5,10-me-THF, 5,10-methylene-THF; PCs, phosphocholines; Rib-5P, ribose-5-phos-
phate; Ser, serine; SAH, S-adenosylhomocysteine; SAH, S-adenosylmethionine; Sarc, sarcosine; THF, tetrahydrofolate; Xan, xanthine.*Note, uric acid was not detected by our study, but was
shown to be altered by Schirinzi, et al. [39]. Enzyme names: BHMT, betaine hydroxymethyltransferase; DMGDH, dimethylglycinedehydrogenase; GNMT, glycine-N-methyltransferase;
HPRT1, hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltransferase 1; MTHFD, methylenetetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase; MTHFR, methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase; MTR, methionine synthase;
SDH, sarcosine dehydrogenase; SHMT, serine hydroxymethyltransferase; XO, xanthine oxidase.
T.M. O'Connell, D.L. Logsdon and R.M. Payne Molecular Genetics and Metabolism 136 (2022) 306–314
311

{'source': 'MolGenetMetab_136_306_2022.pdf', 'page': 6}

study by Bao et al., cells were generated with a dominant negative
mutant of DNA polymerase gamma, thereby stopping replication of
mtDNA and leading to the depletion of components of oxidative
phosphorylation [43]. They demonstrated that lesioning the respira-
tory chain impaired mitochondrial production of formate from ser-
ine and that in some cells, respiratory chain inhibition leads to
growth defects upon withdrawal of serine that were rescued with
purine or formate supplementation.
In a study of cultured cancer cells, Meisner et al., showed that most of
the serine derived one carbon units are released from the cells as for-
mate and depend upon reverse 10-formyl-THF activity. Formate release
was coupled to mitochondrial complex I activity and it was found that
both serine starvation and complex I inhibition led to reduced formate
synthesis [44].
4. Summary
In this study, the population of FA subjects was composed of 45% fe-
male, 55% male participants, and 55% were on cardiac medications (all
were of the long-actingβ-blocker class of medicines). Yet despite the
variability in sex and medication proﬁles, and variability in cardiac func-
tion, several metabolites for the FA subjects had remarkably narrow
standard deviations (Supplemental Fig. 1), such as formate and
sarcosine. This would again suggest that the 1C metabolic pathway is
speciﬁcally impacted by loss of FXN in FA and may represent both a di-
agnostic biomarker as well as a therapeutic target in this disease. In par-
ticular, the potential of these metabolites to serve as biomarkers
reﬂective of therapeutic intervention cannot be overstated. There are
currently no biochemical assays reﬂective of the FA disease that have
high enough speciﬁcity, or rapid enough response, to serve as a bio-
marker for a therapeutic drug trial or intervention. Thus, it will be difﬁ-
cult to evaluate drug dose and toxicity response for new therapeutics if
the evaluation must depend only on changes in the clinical condition
over an extended period of time.
We have demonstrated that FA is characterized by a distinct set of
metabolic perturbations that have the capacity to provide clear and
accurate discrimination between FA patients and controls. The
strengths of this study include: 1) strikingly clear metabolomic proﬁles
even with a small cohort size. 2) clear implication for disruption of
one‑carbon metabolism, which may be both a therapeutic target as
well as a diagnostic biomarker. 3) potential for development of a bio-
marker panel capable of rapid response to therapeutic intervention.
Weaknesses in this study include: 1) small cohort sizes, which prevents
signiﬁcant correlation with GAA repeat numbers or clinical correlation,
such as heart failure. 2) lack of children in the study. 3) lack of longitu-
dinal sampling and follow up to determine if the metabolic proﬁle
changes over time or correlates with worsening of the disease. 4) al-
though unlikely, the possible impact of various medications on the FA
subjects cannot be ignored.
Because our analyses focused on plasma, this limits our ability to as-
cribe these metabolic defects to any particular organ system at this time.
We know that FA has profound and pleotropic effects on the brain and
nervous system, heart, skeletal muscle, liver, and other high-energy de-
pendent organs such as eye. Thus, the next steps in this study will be the
retro-translation of theseﬁndings to preclinical models including the
use of well-established murine models of FA. This would enable a
focus on the perturbations in individual organs to provide a more de-
tailed mechanistic picture of the metabolic derangements of FA. It
would also allow determination of response to a therapeutic interven-
tion, which would support advancement to clinical trials. Finally, these
data strongly require evaluation of their diagnostic biomarker perfor-
mance in a much larger patient cohort in order to validate theseﬁnd-
ings. The results of this pilot study are theﬁrst to show the diagnostic
potential of metabolic proﬁles for FA and point to dysregulated 1C met-
abolic pathways as potential new targets for FA therapeutics.
5. Materials and methods
5.1. Study cohort
This study was reviewed and approved by the Indiana University
School of Medicine Institutional Review Board. Volunteers were
prospectively recruited by advertising and theﬁrst 10 FA subjects
meeting study criteria were enrolled. Inclusion criteria for the FA
subjects included a diagnosis of Friedreich Ataxia based on genetic
analysis, 18 yr or older at time of consent, must not be pregnant,
and have no history of coronary artery disease. Inclusion criteria
for 11 control (Con) subjects were the same except they must not
have a diagnosis of FA or other systemic disease such as diabetes.
All participants gave written informed consent for their participa-
tion in the study, and the studywas conducted according to the
Helsinki principles.
Biometric data for subjects included age, sex, height, weight, and
body mass index (BMI) calculated as kg/M2. Medications of the FA and
Con subjects were recorded. Bloods for metabolomics analysis were
drawn into EDTA tubes, spun, and plasma was aliquoted and stored
frozen (−80 °C) until use.
5.2. NMR-based metabolomics
Samples for NMR analyses were prepared using established proto-
cols [45]. NMR data were acquired on a Bruker AVANCE III, 700 MHz
NMR equipped with a cryogenically-cooled probe. Spectra were col-
lected with a 1D NOESY pulse sequence covering 12 ppm. The spectra
were digitized with 32,768 points during a 3.9 s acquisition time. The
mixing time was set to 100 ms, and the relaxation delay between
scans was set to 2.0 s. The untargeted NMR analyses quantiﬁed 26 me-
tabolites. The data was processed and analyzed using the Chenomx
NMR Processor and Proﬁlers software packages (Chenomx Inc., Edmon-
ton, Alberta, Canada).
5.3. Targeted MS-based metabolomics
The targeted MS experiments used the Biocrates Q500 kit (Biocrates
AG. Innsbruck, Austria) run on an AB Sciex 5500 QTRAP with an Agilent
1290 UPLC. Preparation of serum samples followed vendor protocols.
This assay yielded quantitative measures of 495 metabolites. Data pro-
cessing was carried out using the Biocrates MetIDQ software. Metabo-
lites with concentrations of zero in >50% of the samples were excluded.
5.4. Data integration and biomarker analysis
Integration, statistical analysis and visualization of the metabolo-
mics data was carried out using the VIIME platform (www.viime.
org)[ 46] along with custom scripts written in the R programming
language [47].The network correlation analyses and correlogram
were generate using the corrplot package in R. The network commu-
nity analysis utilized the visualization capabilities in the igraph
package. The receiver operator characteristic (ROC) analysis was
carried out in MetaboAnalyst (version 5.0) [48] using the multivari-
ate exploratory analysis functions. Brieﬂy, ROC curves were gener-
ated by Monte-Carlo cross- validation with classi ﬁcation and
ranking carried out using the Random Forests algorithm including
two latent variables.
Author contributions
TMO and RMP conceived and designed the research, DLL collected
and processed the data, TMO performed the analyses, TMO and RMP
wrote the manuscript. All authors read and approved the manuscript.
T.M. O'Connell, D.L. Logsdon and R.M. Payne Molecular Genetics and Metabolism 136 (2022) 306–314
312

{'source': 'MolGenetMetab_136_306_2022.pdf', 'page': 7}

Funding
RMP is supported by a Grant from NHLBI 1P01HL134599. TMO is
supported by Grants from NIAMS, P01AG039355 and P30AR072581.
Support for this work was also provided in part by the Herman B
Wells Center from the Riley Children's Foundation (RMP),
Ethical approval
All procedures performed in studies involving human partici-
pants were in accordance with the ethical standards of the institu-
tional and/or national rese arch committee and with the 1964
Helsinki declaration and its later amendments or comparable ethi-
cal standards.
Declaration of Competing Interest
Dr. Payne is a consultant for Larimar Therapeutics, Inc., which had no
participation or input in this project. Dr. O'Connell declares no conﬂicts
of interest.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful for the expertise of Peter Thompson,
PhD at the Molecular Education, Technology and Research Innova-
tion Center at North Carolina State University in collecting the
NMR spectra.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online athttps://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2022.06.002.
References
[1] M. Pandolfo, Friedreich ataxia: the clinical picture, J. Neurol. 256 (Suppl. 1) (2009)
3–8.
[2] P.L. Reddy, R.P. Grewal, Friedreich’s ataxia: a clinical and genetic analysis, Clin.
Neurol. Neurosurg. 109 (2007) 200–202.
[3] I. De Biase, A. Rasmussen, D. Endres, S. Al-Mahdawi, A. Monticelli, S. Cocozza, M.
Pook, S.I. Bidichandani, Progressive GAA expansions in dorsal root ganglia of
Friedreich’s ataxia patients, Ann. Neurol. 61 (2007) 55–60.
[4] A.Y. Tsou, E.K. Paulsen, S.J. Lagedrost, S.L. Perlman, K.D. Mathews, G.R. Wilmot, B.
Ravina, A.H. Koeppen, D.R. Lynch, Mortality in friedreich ataxia, J. Neurol. Sci. 307
(2011) 46–49.
[5] R.L. Hewer, Study of fatal cases of Friedreich's ataxia, BMJ (1968) 649–652 Clinical
research ed 3.
[6] L. Schols, G. Amoiridis, H. Przuntek, G. Frank, J.T. Epplen, C. Epplen, Friedreich's
ataxia: revision of the phenotype according to molecular genetics, Brain 120
(1997) 2131–2140.
[7] A. Filla, G. De Michele, R. Marconi, L. Bucci, C. Carillo, A.E. Castellano, L. Iorio, C.
Kniahynicki, F. Rossi, G. Campanella, Prevalence of hereditary ataxias and spastic
paraplegias in Molise, a region of Italy, J. Neurol. 239 (1992) 351–353.
[8] G. Romeo, P. Menozzi, A. Ferlini, S. Fadda, S. Di Donato, G. Uziel, B. Lucci, L.
Capodaglio, A. Filla, G. Campanella, Incidence of Friedreich ataxia in Italy estimated
from consanguineous marriages, Am. J. Hum. Genet. 35 (1983) 523–529.
[9] H. Skre, Friedreich's ataxia in Western Norway, Clin. Genet. 7 (1975) 287–298.
[10] C. Epplen, J.T. Epplen, G. Frank, B. Miterski, E.J. Santos, L. Schols, Differential stability
of the (GAA)n tract in the Friedreich ataxia (STM7) gene, Hum. Genet. 99 (1997)
834–836.
[11] V. Campuzano, L. Montermini, M.D. Molto, L. Pianese, M. Cossee, F. Cavalcanti, E.
Monros, F. Rodius, F. Duclos, A. Monticelli, F. Zara, J. Canizares, H. Koutnikova, S.I.
Bidichandani, C. Gellera, A. Brice, P. Trouillas, G. De Michele, A. Filla, R. De Frutos,
F. Palau, P.I. Patel, S. Di Donato, J.L. Mandel, S. Cocozza, M. Koenig, M. Pandolfo,
Friedreich's ataxia: autosomal recessive disease caused by an intronic GAA triplet
repeat expansion, Science 271 (1996) 1423–1427.
[12] L. Montermini, A. Richter, K. Morgan, C.M. Justice, D. Julien, B. Castellotti, J. Mercier, J.
Poirier, F. Capozzoli, J.P. Bouchard, B. Lemieux, J. Mathieu, M. Vanasse, M.H. Seni, G.
Graham, F. Andermann, E. Andermann, S.B. Melancon, B.J. Keats, S. Di Donato, M.
Pandolfo, Phenotypic variability in Friedreich ataxia: role of the associated GAA trip-
let repeat expansion, Ann. Neurol. 41 (1997) 675–682.
[13] A. Filla, G. De Michele, F. Cavalcanti, L. Pianese, A. Monticelli, G. Campanella, S.
Cocozza, The relationship between trinucleotide (GAA) repeat length and clinical
features in Friedreich ataxia am, J. Hum. Genet. 59 (1996) 554–560.
[14] A. Pastore, H. Puccio, Frataxin: a protein in search for a function, J. Neurochem. 126
(Suppl. 1) (2013) 43–52.
[15] N.G. Fox, X. Yu, X. Feng, H.J. Bailey, A. Martelli, J.F. Nabhan, C. Strain-Damerell, C.
Bulawa, W.W. Yue, S. Han, Structure of the human frataxin-bound iron-sulfur clus-
ter assembly complex provides insight into its activation mechanism, Nat. Commun.
10 (2019) 2210.
[16] G.R. Wagner, P.M. Pride, C.M. Babbey, R.M. Payne, Friedreich’sa t a x i ar e v e a l sam e c h -
anism for coordinate regulation of oxidative metabolism via feedback inhibition of
the SIRT3 deacetylase, Hum. Mol. Genet. 21 (2012) 2688–2697.
[17] A.S. Martin, D.M. Abraham, K.A. Hershberger, D.P. Bhatt, L. Mao, H. Cui, J. Liu, X. Liu,
M.J. Muehlbauer, P.A. Grimsrud, J.W. Locasale, R.M. Payne, M.D. Hirschey, Nicotin-
amide mononucleotide requires SIRT3 to improve cardiac function and bioenerget-
ics in a Friedreich's ataxia cardiomyopathy model, JCI Insight. 2 (2017).
[18] A.C. Haugen, N.A. Di Prospero, J.S. Parker, R.D. Fannin, J. Chou, J.N. Meyer, C. Halweg,
J.B. Collins, A. Durr, K. Fischbeck, B. Van Houten, Altered gene expression and DNA
damage in peripheral blood cells from Friedreich’s ataxia patients: cellular model
of pathology, PLoS Genet. 6 (2010), e1000812.
[19] G.R. Wagner, R.M. Payne, Widespread and enzyme-independent Nepsilon-
acetylation and Nepsilon-succinylation of proteins in the chemical conditions of
the mitochondrial matrix, J. Biol. Chem. 288 (2013) 29036–29045.
[20] A.R. Stram, G.R. Wagner, B.D. Fogler, P.M. Pride, M.D. Hirschey, R.M. Payne, Progres-
sive mitochondrial protein lysine acetylation and heart failure in a model of
Friedreich's ataxia cardiomyopathy, PLoS One 12 (2017), e0178354.
[21] K. Reetz, I. Dogan, R.D. Hilgers, P. Giunti, M.H. Parkinson, C. Mariotti, L. Nanetti, A.
Durr, C. Ewenczyk, S. Boesch, W. Nachbauer, T. Klopstock, C. Stendel, F.J. Rodriguez
de Rivera Garrido, C. Rummey, L. Schols, S.N. Hayer, T. Klockgether, I. Giordano, C.
Didszun, M. Rai, M. Pandolfo, J.B. Schulz, E.s. group, progression characteristics of
the European Friedreich’s Ataxia consortium for translational studies (EFACTS): a
4-year cohort study, Lancet Neurol. 20 (2021) 362–372.
[22] C.B. Clish, Metabolomics: an emerging but powerful tool for precision medicine,
Cold Spring Harb. Mol. Case Stud. 1 (2015), a000588.
[23] M.E. Newman, M. Girvan, Finding and evaluating community structure in networks,
Phys. Rev. E Stat. Nonlinear Soft Matter Phys. 69 (2004), 026113.
[24] G. Hayashi, Y. Shen, T.L. Pedersen, J.W. Newman, M. Pook, G. Cortopassi, Frataxin de-
ﬁciency increases cyclooxygenase 2 and prostaglandins in cell and animal models of
Friedreich’s ataxia, Hum. Mol. Genet. 23 (2014) 6838–6847.
[25] H. Zhao, H. Li, S. Hao, J. Chen, J. Wu, C. Song, M. Zhang, T. Qiao, K. Li, Peptide SS-31
upregulates frataxin expression and improves the quality of mitochondria: implica-
tions in the treatment of Friedreich ataxia, Sci. Rep. 7 (2017) 9840.
[26] A. Wong, J. Yang, P. Cavadini, C. Gellera, B. Lonnerdal, F. Taroni, G. Cortopassi, The
Friedreich's ataxia mutation confers cellular sensitivity to oxidant stress which is
rescued by chelators of iron and calcium and inhibitors of apoptosis, Hum. Mol.
Genet. 8 (1999) 425–430.
[27] P. Rustin, D. Bonnet, A. Rotig, A. Munnich, D. Sidi, Idebenone treatment in Friedreich
patients: one-year-long randomized placebo-controlled trial, Neurology 62 (2004)
524–525 (author reply 525; discussion 525).
[28] M. Pandolfo, J. Arpa, M.B. Delatycki, K.H. Le Quan Sang, C. Mariotti, A. Munnich, I.
Sanz-Gallego, G. Tai, M.A. Tarnopolsky, F. Taroni, M. Spino, F. Tricta, Deferiprone in
Friedreich ataxia: a 6-month randomized controlled trial, Ann. Neurol. 76 (2014)
509–521.
[29] P.E. Hart, R. Lodi, B. Rajagopalan, J.L. Bradley, J.G. Crilley, C. Turner, A.M. Blamire, D.
Manners, P. Styles, A.H. Schapira, J.M. Cooper, Antioxidant treatment of patients
with Friedreich ataxia: four-year follow-up, Arch. Neurol. 62 (2005) 621–626.
[30] K. Burk, Friedreich Ataxia: current status and future prospects, Cerebellum Ataxias 4
(2017) 4.
[31] B. A, Friedreich's Ataxia 1976 An overview, Can. J. Neurosci. 3 (1976) 389–397.
[32] Y.S. Huang, A.C. Nestruck, A. Barbeau, J.P. Bouchard, J. Davignon, Plasma lipids and
lipoproteins in Friedreich’s ataxia and familial spastic ataxia–evidence for an abnor-
mal composition of high density lipoproteins, Can J. Neurol. Sci. 5 (1978) 149–156.
[33] Q. Wang, L. Guo, C.J. Strawser, L.A. Hauser, W.T. Hwang, N.W. Snyder, D.R. Lynch, C.
Mesaros, I.A. Blair, Low apolipoprotein A-I levels in Friedreich’s ataxia and in
frataxin-deﬁcient cells: implications for therapy, PLoS One 13 (2018), e0192779.
[34] M. Cnop, H. Mulder, M. Igoillo-Esteve, Diabetes in Friedreich ataxia, J. Neurochem.
126 (Suppl. 1) (2013) 94–102.
[35] G. Finocchiaro, G. Baio, P. Micossi, G. Pozza, S. di Donato, Glucose metabolism alter-
ations in Friedreich's ataxia, Neurology 38 (1988) 1292–1296.
[36] L.M. Stead, J.T. Brosnan, M.E. Brosnan, D.E. Vance, R.L. Jacobs, Is it time to reevaluate
methyl balance in humans? Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 83 (2006) 5–10.
[37] G.S. Ducker, J.D. Rabinowitz, One-carbon metabolism in health and disease, Cell
Metab. 25 (2017) 27–42.
[38] B.J. Henriques, R. Katrine Jentoft Olsen, C.M. Gomes, P. Bross, Electron transferﬂavo-
protein and its role in mitochondrial energy metabolism in health and disease, Gene
776 (2021), 145407.
[39] Z. Luka, S.H. Mudd, C. Wagner, Glycine N-methyltransferase and regulation of S-
adenosylmethionine levels, J. Biol. Chem. 284 (2009) 22507–22511.
[40] T. Schirinzi, G. Vasco, G. Zanni, S. Petrillo, F. Piemonte, E. Castelli, E.S. Bertini, Serum
uric acid in Friedreich Ataxia, Clin. Biochem. 54 (2018) 139–141.
[41] J. Thompson Legault, L. Strittmatter, J. Tardif, R. Sharma, V. Tremblay-Vaillancourt, C.
Aubut, G. Boucher, C.B. Clish, D. Cyr, C. Daneault, P.J. Waters, L. Consortium, L.
Vachon, C. Morin, C. Laprise, J.D. Rioux, V.K. Mootha, C. Des Rosiers, A metabolic sig-
nature of mitochondrial dysfunction revealed through a monogenic form of leigh
syndrome, Cell Rep. 13 (2015) 981–989.
[42] R. Sharma, B. Reinstadler, K. Engelstad, O.S. Skinner, E. Stackowitz, R.G. Haller, C.B.
Clish, K. Pierce, M.A. Walker, R. Fryer, D. Oglesbee, X. Mao, D.C. Shungu, A. Khatri,
M. Hirano, D.C. De Vivo, V.K. Mootha, Circulating markers of NADH-reductive stress
correlate with mitochondrial disease severity, J. Clin. Invest. 131 (2021).
[43] X.R. Bao, S.E. Ong, O. Goldberger, J. Peng, R. Sharma, D.A. Thompson, S.B. Vafai, A.G.
Cox, E. Marutani, F. Ichinose, W. Goessling, A. Regev, S.A. Carr, C.B. Clish, V.K.
T.M. O'Connell, D.L. Logsdon and R.M. Payne Molecular Genetics and Metabolism 136 (2022) 306–314
313

{'source': 'MolGenetMetab_136_306_2022.pdf', 'page': 8}

Mootha, Mitochondrial dysfunction remodels one-carbon metabolism in human
cells, eLife 5 (2016).
[44] J. Meiser, S. Tumanov, O. Maddocks, C.F. Labuschagne, D. Athineos, N. Van Den
Broek, G.M. Mackay, E. Gottlieb, K. Blyth, K. Vousden, J.J. Kamphorst, A. Vazquez, Ser-
ine one-carbon catabolism with formate overﬂow, Sci. Adv. 2 (2016), e1601273.
[45] O. Beckonert, H.C. Keun, T.M. Ebbels, J. Bundy, E. Holmes, J.C. Lindon, J.K. Nicholson,
Metabolic proﬁling, metabolomic and metabonomic procedures for NMR spectros-
copy of urine, plasma, serum and tissue extracts, Nat. Protoc. 2 (2007) 2692–2703.
[46] R. Choudhury, J. Beezley, B. Davis, J. Tomeck, S. Gratzl, L. Golzarri-Arroyo, J. Wan, D.
Raftery, J. Baumes, T.M. O'Connell, Viime: visualization and integration of metabolo-
mics experiments, J. Open Source Software 5 (2020) 2410–2423.
[47] R Core Team, R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing, R Founda-
tion for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria, 2017https://www.r-project.org/.
[48] J. Chong, O. Soufan, C. Li, I. Caraus, S. Li, G. Bourque, D.S. Wishart, J. Xia, Metabo-
Analyst 4.0: towards more transparent and integrative metabolomics analysis,
Nucleic Acids Res. 46 (2018) W486–W494.
T.M. O'Connell, D.L. Logsdon and R.M. Payne Molecular Genetics and Metabolism 136 (2022) 306–314
314
